Good afternoon.
So, I'm Geoffrey Keating,
and this talk is Moving to gcc 4.0,
talk 404, session not found.
So we have a new compiler.
You've probably already noticed.
gcc 4.0 shipped with TigerGM,
and you have a slightly newer
version on the DVDs that were
handed out to you earlier.
So I'm going to talk
a bit about it today.
So I'm going to cover three basic topics.
First, why should you move to 4.0?
What new features or speed
improvements or bug fixes are in 4.0
that might make you want to move?
And of course, what new features might
cause you to need to move,
even if you're not particularly
enthusiastic about it?
We're also going to talk about
some of the consequences of all of
the improvements that we've made.
Some of the new features are things
that really might affect you,
things that you might want to use,
or things that maybe now you can
take away some of the workarounds
that you've been using before.
I'm also going to talk about bug fixes.
We have a lot of bug fixes in gcc 4.0.
It's a really incredibly stable compiler.
But some of the bug fixes are things
where the compiler was improperly
accepting code that really it
shouldn't have ever been accepting.
And so I'm going to go through a
bunch of those and show you how to
fix your code if you've accidentally
been using some of these cases.
The -- probably the most important
reason why you might want to move
to gcc 4.0 is because it is the
only supported compiler for building
Intel applications at present.
There are going to be other
compilers from third-party vendors,
but this is Apple's compiler.
Another reason why you might need to
move to 4.0 is because it's required
for building 64-bit executables.
So Intel or 64-bit, if you need it,
you have to use 4.0.
A reason that you might want to
move to 4.0 is because it's faster.
Gcc 4.0 is a noticeably
quicker compiler than gcc 3.3.
We've been continuing our
program of speed improvements.
You can see from the graphs there,
it's between 15% faster and
about 5%, depending on what
kind of code you're using.
So these are significant improvements.
It's 15% is big enough to be noticeable.
So if you move to 4.0,
your productivity will improve a bit
because of the faster turnaround times.
And so that in itself is, you know,
a reason to consider moving.
Gcc 4.0 also has slightly
better code generation.
We've completely rewritten
many of the optimizers.
In Xcode 2.0, shipped with Tiger,
it was about the same speed as 3.3,
right?
And we've been continuing to improve it,
and now it's slightly faster on a random
industry standard benchmark that just
happens to come in floating flavors.
Another big feature with 4.0
is the shared C++ runtime.
It's available in Panther 10.3.9 with the
software update and in Tiger and later.
The big benefit of the shared
C++ runtime is a significant
reduction in application size,
between 200K and a megabyte or so.
This gives you faster app loading and
faster switching between applications,
which is a significant improvement to the
user responsibility of your application.
It also, because there's now a
single dynamic library,
it means we can occasionally fix bugs
in your operating system releases
and automatically transfer those
improvements to your application.
And it also means we could do some
things which were only possible
when you had a single bunch of
code managing the C++ runtime.
In particular,
we've improved correctness with streams.
So now output from multiple dynamic
libraries in your application
gets interleaved properly.
So I said that was available
only on 10.3.9 and later.
So let's talk about what gcc 4.0
will actually build code for.
You can see there the big target of gcc
4.0 is that you can use gcc 4.0 with the
universal SDK to build Intel binaries.
gcc 4.0 also supports 10.4 and 10.3.9,
either using the Mac OS X deployment
target method or using the SDKs.
And it also goes back to 10-- well,
in theory to 10.0 for C and Objective-C.
Once you go back to Jaguar,
there's a few bugs that need
workarounds and that kind of thing.
We don't have C++ support for
gcc 4.0 on early versions of
Panther on Jaguar on Puma.
You can compare this to the
other columns in the table,
and you see that 3.3 doesn't
support Intel binaries,
and previous versions of the
compiler are no longer really
supported for using the new SDKs.
They still continue to work
fine when using SDKs for old
versions of the operating system.
So another consequence of the switch over
to the Dynamics C++ standard library is
that you might notice when the first time
you try to build your app with 4.0 is
that a lot of the old templates used to
include libs to C++.a directly as part of
the list of Xcode libraries to link in.
This is no longer necessary and, in fact,
no longer possible because a .a
file is not a shared library.
So you'll see it comes
up in Xcode as red,
meaning the file is no longer there,
and so what you should
simply do is just delete it.
You don't need it anymore.
The compiler will automatically
link in the C++ standard
library when you link C++ code.
Another big feature in gcc
4.0 is 128-bit long double.
It gives you 53 extra bits of precision
compared to the regular double
precision floating point values.
This is going to be part of the
permanent API on PowerPC Mac OS,
and the support functions are
available in 10.3.9 and later.
Compilers before gcc 4.0 warned
on every use of long double,
so long as you didn't
switch the warning off,
you shouldn't have any
instances of that in your code.
So the switchover will be
relatively transparent to you.
Unfortunately, this is not the same as
the Intel long double,
which, although it's 128 bits
on a Macintosh platform,
is only really an 80-bit
floating point value inside,
and a completely
different internal format.
So you can't just copy
structures and such between the
two systems and have them work.
Another of the big improvements
in GCC 4.0 is better CPU support.
We have automatic vectorization starting
to become useful for real applications.
We have vectorized inline memory
operations like memset and memcopy
so that when you switch on,
so that if you allow the compiler
to use vector instructions,
it'll automatically use vectorized
versions of these when it inlines
so you don't have to go back to
scalar code for the inline versions.
Obviously, if you use the out-of-line
copies in the system,
that'll work just fine,
and that'll be vectorized just
fine anyway because the system
will have the latest versions.
In Xcode 2.0 in Panther,
we added a nice UI so that you can create
universal executables for each processor.
So in previous talks,
you'll have heard about how you can
create a universal executable that
has both PowerPC and Intel code on it.
You don't have to just stop
at one flavor of PowerPC.
You can have 64-bit PowerPC,
you can have PowerPC that's
32-bit and tuned for g3,
g4, or g5, and you can have Intel code
all in the same binary.
So that would give you what we
call a five-way universal binary.
That might be going a little bit too far,
unless you have a really
performance-critical application
where it really matters that
g5 and g4 are different.
You can access this support in Xcode
2.0 by finding the architecture
build setting and double-clicking
on it or clicking on edit.
And that pops up this dialog box,
which is not to scale.
And so you can simply pick
what architectures you want.
Unfortunately, in Xcode 2.1,
this support was simplified to make
it easier to find the Intel settings.
So in Xcode 2.1,
the dialog box only offers PowerPC,
which is 32-bit G3, and Intel support.
But you can still hit enter on the
field and add the other targets by hand.
So for instance,
you can add PPC64 to build your
program as a 64-bit executable.
And you can add a range of other targets.
You can add PPC970, meaning a G5,
and so on.
And so you can simply add
all five settings in there.
And Xcode will automatically
build your executable and tune
it for each target individually.
This lets you use
autovectorization most efficiently.
With autovectorization,
the compiler really needs to be
told that it's allowed to use
all of the vector instructions.
Otherwise,
it can't autovectorize anything.
So what we recommend is that you do
try to tell the compiler that the
whole object file is only going to run
on a g4 or only going to run on a g5,
if that's what the case actually is.
So if you have an object file
that contains all of your AlteVec
code and then the rest of your app
calls into that but only on a g4,
then tell the compiler that this file can
run -- that it's allowed to use AlteVec
instructions throughout that file.
We would prefer that you try not to
switch on the Altevec intrinsics for
files that are supposed to run on a g3.
To do this,
the compiler assumes that some
of the code is obviously Altevec
and therefore has to run on a g4,
and then some of the code is not
Altevec and therefore it mustn't
have any Altevec instructions in
it because it's running on a g3.
And so the compiler has to disable
some optimizations to do that.
So it's better to try and separate
your code so you have Altevec
in one file and not Altevec or
can run on a g3 in other files.
Another big advantage of this compiler
is we have new and better warnings.
Lots of them.
Lots and lots of them.
So we know there's a lot,
but please read them.
A lot of these warnings really are trying
to point out problems in your code.
So you should look at them and you
should try and fix them if possible.
Because there are so many new warnings,
you may not be able to
fix them all right away.
So if you have a W error,
warnings as errors,
in your build settings,
you might want to consider
temporarily removing it to get
your program going with gcc 4.0.
We have a new warning for
Objective C that warns about
strict selector matching.
If at all possible,
you should switch this on.
It catches a bunch of real bugs,
and we're particularly highlighting it
because a lot of the bugs are otherwise
difficult to find in your program.
You should also watch
for warnings that say,
if this code is reached,
the program will abort.
It means that your program really
will abort when it reaches that code.
So what you need to do is either
remove the warning or check to see
that the code is never executed.
While you're looking
at your build settings,
there are some really old flags
that no longer do anything.
So you might want to
consider removing them.
For instance, wno-precomp.
We haven't had precomp support
in the compiler since gcc 3.1,
so you don't need to disable
any warnings about it.
Those warnings are long gone.
There are a collection of
flags about coalescing.
Coalescing is the internal
linkage system that gcc uses to
ensure that in a C++ application,
the duplicate function
definitions are removed.
It's the default.
It's been the default
for quite some time now,
and the flags to switch it on and
off are -- the flags to switch
it on are no longer necessary,
and they have been removed.
Also, if you've been tweaking the
optimization settings in your project,
so for instance, you've been changing
the inlining parameters,
then you really want to
revisit that for gcc 4.0.
We've completely revised
all the optimizers,
so what these parameters mean now
is no longer what they used to mean,
and some of these parameters
have been removed altogether.
So you probably want to start by removing
all of those settings and then adding
them back in as you find performance
problems with probably new settings.
So let's talk about
Code Warrior Assembler because I know
that's a topic that people really
seem to like in gcc 3.3 especially if
you have to move from Code Warrior to
gcc 4.0 in a single jump.
So we've improved the support a bit.
We've improved it a bit,
some in Xcode 2.0, and we've further
improved it in Xcode 2.1.
Gcc now better analyzes
the instruction streams,
so it knows which registers are used,
it knows what instructions you're using,
it has an idea of which registers are
outputs and which registers are inputs.
So a lot of bugs in that
area have gone away.
The big Objective C++ improvement is that
instance variables now run constructors.
So, you can take all of those complex C++
types from the C++ standard library and
put them inside your Objective C objects.
So, this is a significant advance if
you're using Objective C++ a lot.
It does require you to
switch on a new flag,
which is named something
almost intuitive.
And unfortunately,
because this requires the
Objective C runtime to
actually call the constructors,
it requires support from it.
And that support's only
available in Tiger.
So, you can use this immediately if
you're only targeting Tiger or later.
Otherwise,
you'll have to wait until you can.
So we also made a bunch of improvements
involving symbol visibility.
First of all, the old syntax of private
extern is still available.
It actually works a bit better
than it ever used to before.
But the recommended syntax is that
you use gcc standard attribute syntax.
You get two choices, hidden,
which means private extern, and default,
which means not.
But we don't recommend that you
go through and individually attach
the hidden attribute to all of the
things you don't want exported.
Normally, from a management perspective,
it's a lot easier if you make
everything hidden by default and
only make visible the things that
you really expected to make visible.
So there's a checkbox in Xcode,
symbols hidden by default,
a very intuitive name.
And then to make the things visible,
you just add the attribute and
you say the visibility is default.
The big improvement that we've made is
that this also now works on C++ classes.
So when you have your
framework that's exporting C++
classes to your application,
you can use this to control which
classes really get exported.
We also switched it on by default
for applications because if the
linker and the dynamic linker know
that this symbol can't be exported,
then it can use a
faster calling sequence,
which actually significantly
improves your app's performance.
This worked great except
in two situations.
If you have plug-ins that actually try to
reference symbols from your application,
then this isn't going to
work if they're hidden.
And if you use dynamic cast
between classes that are in the
inner framework and also possibly
defined in your application,
they'll be treated as different classes
and therefore it won't work right.
So if you want to do that,
you need to switch it off.
And you can do this in Xcode.
These two buttons here,
and in particular the top one,
symbols hidden by default,
will be on by default for an application,
so you just switch it off.
If you do that,
you probably also want to make
sure that the inline functions
hidden checkbox is switched on.
Unless you're actually comparing the
address to the address of the function
between a dial and your application,
then it's much more efficient
to have the functions -- to
have inline functions be hidden.
It means the linker can make a direct
call to them instead of having to
potentially look at a framework.
You can find these two by typing
hidden into the fairly large code
generation set of compiler options.
I said earlier we fixed bugs.
We fixed lots of bugs.
We fixed maybe thousands of bugs.
Most of these bugs you will never
notice that they were fixed,
or if you do,
it's only as a relief that you can
finally stop worrying about it.
Some of the bugs, as I said before,
are about code that was
accepted before incorrectly,
that should never have been accepted,
and that now we've managed,
and that now the compiler properly
creates an error message for.
So I'm going to run you
through a bunch of examples.
Although this is not
really a hands-on talk,
we do have sample code
for each of the examples,
so you don't need to take
notes for each example.
You can get the sample code
at the URL at the bottom,
and you may -- and -- but you
don't need to get it right now.
We're going to be -- I'm going to be
showing you them all on the screen.
So the first example that I'm
going to talk about is the one
that most people seem to hit.
It's about dependent name lookup.
So C++ has this concept when you're
using templates of a dependent name.
The different--a dependent name
is something that in some way
depends on a template parameter.
So in this case,
the template parameter is T.
If a name is dependent
on a template parameter,
then the compiler can't--then the
compiler can't and in fact mustn't look
it up until the template is instantiated.
If it's not dependent,
the compiler looks it up right away.
Previous versions of the compiler
didn't get this quite right.
It would tend to delay looking
up nearly everything until
the template was instantiated.
This meant that names which were not
dependent would be--would sometimes
be looked up in the wrong context.
Gcc now gets this right.
In this example here, though,
this is an example of some code
that would have been accepted with
3.3 and that is no longer accepted,
and you get an error message.
As you can see there, class local was not
declared in this scope.
When that happens-- so the
problem here is that class local
is dependent-- is not explicitly
dependent on the template parameter t.
and is not otherwise visible because
it's only visible in this other class,
"SomeClass," which itself is dependent,
and therefore not part of the names
that the compiler will look up.
So what you have to do to fix
this is you've got to make
"classLocalBe" a dependent name.
And at this point,
you can probably forget most
of that long explanation.
All you really need to know is that
when you get this error message,
you need to insert this
in front of the name.
Nine times out of ten,
that will fix your problem,
and you don't need to
think about it any further.
Along with the other
template improvements,
we've now-- gcc now properly
checks for the presence or
absence of the type name keyword.
And in fact,
it won't parse your class properly
if you don't have it there.
So it does give a helpful error message
to basically tell you to use type name.
And so you actually do need to do that.
And of course, you just add it in.
Likewise, gcc needs proper use of
the template keyword.
When you have an example here of--when
you have a case here of a template
function inside a class--sorry,
inside an expression like that,
the C++ standard requires that you use
the template keyword before the function
to let the compiler know that the thing
that is the template is the function
and that this zero is not supposed
to be attached to something else.
And so, simply add it.
Let's see.
So another case where the compiler
is improved in C++ is that it's now
better at detecting--it now properly
implements the C++ rules for in-class
initialization of static members.
There are two rules that you
need to be particularly aware of.
First of all,
you're only allowed to have a
static constant member like this
in a class with an initializer.
If the actual type is an integer type,
as an extension,
gcc allows floating point types.
It does not allow pointers or other such
-- or classes or anything like that.
So what you need to do is,
if you have code that does this,
the compiler will tell you
that you can't do that,
and you need to take the
initialization out of the class.
So you simply remove the
initializer from the class and
then place it in the definition.
Another case where the compiler is
improved is in the case of members
which actually are integers.
So here we have an int.
You're allowed to do this.
That's fine.
However,
this is not a definition of the variable.
It just declares that the
variable exists and that it's
always going to have that value.
So GCC has become
better about optimizing.
And so now,
sometimes you're going to see an
error message from the linker saying
that this variable is undefined.
And it's actually right.
You haven't provided a definition.
So you need to make sure you provide one.
And the syntax for that looks like this.
You don't continue to add the
initializer because you've
already got one in the class.
But you do need to mention it somewhere.
Another case where the compiler better
adheres to this standard is in the case
of access checking and copy constructors.
So, let's see.
So here we have a case where we have a
private copy constructor for the class A.
So whenever the compiler needs
to make a temporary for a class
and copy the old -- and copy some
other copy of the class into it,
it needs to use the copy constructor.
Making it private says that
it's not allowed to do this,
that there shouldn't be temporaries
floating around that are generated
by the compiler or by the user,
that you want to in some way
control the use of this class.
So in this case here,
we have a function which takes a
reference to one of these classes,
and it's being called
with a newly created copy.
Iso C++ says that when this happens,
an extra temporary is created.
So first you get a copy created
with the default constructor,
then you get another temporary created,
and that's what's actually passed--
that's what the reference is taken,
and that's what the reference to is
taken and is passed to the function.
The ISO C++ standard also says
that you don't have to actually
call the copy constructor.
You can just use the one copy.
But it says that if the copy
constructor may not be called,
then the compiler must
not accept this code.
Previously,
gcc 3.3 was eliminating the extra
copy and then also forgetting to check
that the copy constructor could still
have been called if it needed to.
So gcc 4.0 no longer does this.
It properly verifies that the
copy constructor is visible.
So if you have code like this,
what you need to do to fix it is to
avoid the creation of the temporary
copy to make sure that all of
your copies are actually named.
And that's easy enough to do.
You simply have a variable,
a named variable that's going
to be the thing that's created,
and you pass that to
the function instead.
That way there's only one copy
of this class and the copy
constructor need not be called.
Another thing that the
ISO C++ standard says,
which is a little pedantic,
but it does say it,
is that there is only one acceptable
syntax for making a function
an abstract virtual function.
You say virtual int,
and then you declare the function,
and then you say equals 0.
Things that are not exactly the same as
equals 0 are not acceptable substitutes.
So you can't say 0 plus 0,
and you can't say null.
So gcc now correctly checks
for this and will give you a
convenient warning message saying
it really expected to see a 0 there.
And the answer is very simple.
If it needs a 0 there,
that's what you should put.
Another thing that is involved in
the syntax of C++ that's a little bit
more serious is that when you call
new and you're creating a new array,
The syntax of C++ doesn't
permit you to put parentheses
around the name of the class.
If you do put parens around,
that's actually trying to be a
slightly different syntax where
the placement new operator.
So gcc 4.0 now correctly detects
this case and doesn't let you do it.
And the solution is very simple.
Simply delete the parentheses,
and then the compiler will be happy.
Another case where the compiler
has become more strict about a C++
construct is default parameters.
In C++, you're only allowed to declare
a default parameter once.
You can declare it -- ideally,
you should declare it the
first time you mention the
function that has the parameter.
That way it can be used later on.
What you can't do is
do it in both places.
So in this case here,
we've got a function that
has a default parameter,
and it's got it twice.
And ISO C++ says you can't do that.
Once you've said that a function -- once
you've given a default parameter once,
afterwards, you need to simply just
declare the parameter,
and just declare that parameter,
and the default will be taken from the
previous time the function was seen.
Another place where gcc now more
correctly interprets the standard in an
important way is in reinterpret cast.
The compiler used to allow a reinterpret
cast that was a no operation.
So if you had an int and
you cast it again to an int,
it would let that happen.
C++ doesn't permit you to do this.
It requires that a reinterpret
cast actually do something.
The thing that a reinterpret cast
-- a cast that doesn't do anything
is a static cast or a cast that
casts between two integer types.
So we now correctly check for that.
Finally, one more place the C++ compiler
became more strict is in the
use of the offsetof expression.
Offsetof is supposed to be a constant.
You can see in this example,
which was accepted by gcc 3.3,
that the actual offset is going to depend
on this index parameter to the function,
which is not really constant at all.
So gcc now correctly detects this case.
To fix this,
you need to actually make the
computation of the index part yourself.
So instead of putting the index
inside the offsetof construct,
you need to move it out and
multiply it by the appropriate
size to get the right value.
Um, so you've already ported your
app to gcc 4.0 using xcode
2.0 that shipped with Tiger.
And you're done, right?
Well,
we did make one change to xcode 2.1.
It's a trivial change,
and it shouldn't be much of a problem,
but it is a small change.
When you first declare
something in a namespace,
you're supposed to just use the
name as a thing that you declare.
You're not allowed to use
the double colon operator.
So gcc now correctly checks for this
as part of wider changes to interpret
the colon colon operator properly,
and now doesn't let you do it.
And the solution to that is very simple.
You're already in this namespace,
you're declaring something
in the namespace,
you don't need to qualify it.
You can just delete it.
And that will make the
error message go away.
So that was the C++
part of this talk done,
almost.
But we still have some
KEXT issues to talk about.
KEXT didn't change
significantly in the compiler,
but there are two things
that you should know about.
First of all,
static local variables like this.
You can see here we've got a
variable named x inside a function.
And it's of type class 1,
and class 1 has a constructor.
Not a particularly trivial
constructor either,
it actually does some computation.
So in gcc 4.0,
this constructor is now thread safe.
If you're doing this in an application,
gcc will carefully lock around the
first initialization of the variable x,
make sure that x is
only initialized once,
and so on.
In an app, this is great.
In a KEXT, you probably don't want the
compiler inserting random locks
in the middle of your KEXT.
The compiler can't really
actually make the locks do the
right thing inside the kernel,
and it's really impossible for it to try.
I mean,
this could be in some interrupt routine,
and it really can't lock or
block or wait or do anything.
So for KEXTs, we didn't put in the
runtime support for this.
So you'll get two undefined symbols,
cxa guard acquire and cxa guard release.
What this means is you've
got a static initializer,
and the compiler would like to
make it thread-safe but can't.
So there's two possible
solutions to this.
One solution,
simply move the static variable out so
that it's no longer inside the function.
Then it gets initialized
at KEXT load time,
and everything's fine because
KEXT load time is single-threaded.
Another possible solution is that
if you really know that this is safe
and you don't want to move it out,
you can use the no thread
safe statics option,
which is available as a
checkbox in Xcode 2.1.
Of course, if you do this,
you do run the risk that you
might have two threads going
through the initialization,
producing results which
are at best indeterminate,
so you want to make sure
that it's really safe.
The other kext-related change
involves member function pointers.
Previously,
the compiler would let you take
the address of a member function,
and you'd kind of get something very
much like a real function pointer,
but not quite.
That wasn't working very well,
so it was removed.
So in this case here,
we have--we're trying to pass
an interrupt handler to a
routine that will actually call
it when the interrupt happens.
And you can see we're taking the
address of a member function.
So in the new scheme,
this is done with a macro.
The macro is called osMemberFunctionCast,
and all you need to do is
instead of--is--and it takes
a pointer to member function.
So--and it takes a pointer to member and
returns a simple pointer to function.
You do need to pass it the actual
root--the object that you're taking--an
example of an object that you're taking
the address of the member function in.
This is so it can find which virtual
function out of a class hierarchy
is the actual one to call--is
the actual correct one to call.
So, that's the C++ stuff done.
If you've been asleep waiting
for me to talk about C,
now is your time to wake up.
There are a few simple C changes as well.
First of all,
local static function declarations.
You used to be able to
write code like this.
And what we eventually worked out
that gcc was doing when you did this
was that it would be binding--it
would look for some other function
as a file scope static function.
This is not exactly the same
as what happens if you have a
static variable inside a function,
so--and it caused some other problems,
so this extension has now been removed.
So if you have code that does this,
you need to make a very simple change,
which is instead of putting the static
function declaration inside the function,
just move it out.
So this is now standard C and
will work fine everywhere.
Another change that was made to better
support interprocedural optimizations,
in standard C,
once you're not permitted to declare
something extern and then later static.
So GCC no longer permits this
and will give you a helpful error
message saying that you've done this.
And there are two possible
solutions to this again.
One possible solution is to simply
remove the previous external definition,
so you just declare it
static the first time.
Another possible solution
is to interchange the two.
If you say static and later extern,
then in standard C that
means it's still static.
Another simple syntax change that we made
is about labels at the end of a block.
In standard C syntax,
you're not allowed to have a label
as the very last thing in a block.
You have to have a label is
always followed by a statement.
If you don't have any particular
statement to put there,
there's a statement that does nothing,
the null statement,
which is just represented
by a single semicolon,
and that's what you should use.
Let's talk about L values.
L values are things that are on the
left-hand side of an assignment operator,
thus the L.
Previously,
gcc had this fairly interesting
extension where it would let you put
all kinds of things on the left-hand
side of an assignment operator.
It would let you put casts,
it would let you put
conditional expressions,
it would let you put comma expressions,
and it would, in each of these cases,
it would do something
that mostly made sense.
For instance, in the example of the
conditional expression,
it would pick one of the
two and assign to it.
The problem with this is that in C++,
this doesn't do what
it used to do anymore.
It doesn't guarantee that standard
behavior continues to work the same way.
In certain cases,
temporaries wouldn't get created.
In certain cases, the wrong overloaded
function would be chosen.
So we had to take it out.
It's available in the current gcc 4.0
in C and I believe in C++ as a warning.
In the future,
it will go away completely.
So now is a great time to fix this.
So the fix is always very simple.
Instead of having full variables in
these expressions on the left-hand side,
simply take their address,
do your conditional operation
or your cast or your comma
operation to the address,
and then dereference it.
So what that looks like is you add
a bunch of ampersands and stars.
So as I said, gcc 4.0,
we have a new optimization
infrastructure using tree SSA.
We think it's great.
It's going to be -- in the future,
it's going to lead us to significant
improvements in performance.
But because we rewrote everything,
some things that were never --
are never really defined by the
C standard or by the C language now
no longer do what they used to do.
They're still not defined,
and now they're not defined and
they do something different.
You don't really want to be having
not defined behavior in your program.
So in this case here is an
example of a place where you
might have accidentally done this.
This is not -- gives undefined behavior
because you're only allowed to reference
a variable in -- between sequence points,
which is a complicated term
defined in the ISOC standard,
to give it the same value.
So in this example, the question is,
does the plus plus happen before or
after the first I parameter is evaluated?
And the answer is, it's not defined.
It can be either one.
It can be -- it can even be both.
So occasionally, your code's behavior may
change if you have this.
The best way to find such
cases is to switch on warnings.
GCC will give you a
very convenient warning.
Operation on I might be undefined.
When you say such a warning,
it means you've done something like this.
So what you want to do is you want
to split this up into multiple
statements so that the compiler knows
what order things should be done in.
So in this example here,
you see that the code is not defined.
You just want to move the I plus plus out
to either before or pos -- to after or
possibly before the call of the function.
Um, another case where the optimizers
have now become smarter,
and that might lead to
different behavior in your code,
is this case here.
We have a variable named "x" that
hasn't been declared volatile.
We have a cast to make it to
the address of the variable,
with a typo on the slide, sorry.
We have a cast of the address of
the variable to make it volatile,
but the compiler still knows that it
can look through the cast and it can see
the original variable is not volatile,
so it knows that the original
variable can't change behind its back.
So it will compile this
code into an infinite loop,
when what you probably wanted was for
it to actually test "x" every time,
so that you could say,
"Change x in the debugger and
let the program continue."
The solution to this is very simple.
If you need a variable to be volatile,
just declare it as volatile originally,
and then everything will just work.
The last change that we made is that,
well, we changed the version number.
The version number is 4.0.
If you've been testing for
different GCC version numbers,
you might have accidentally been
using a construct like this,
where you check to see if
the minor version number is
greater than or equal to 1.
Well, so 4.0 is greater than 3,
but .0 is not greater than 1.
So if you were using
a construct like this,
it won't work.
So be aware of this in your code.
If you see anything like this,
you need to change it to
explicitly check that it's 3.1 or
higher than .1 or higher than 3.
So, that's the end of the code examples,
and remember they are
all in the sample code,
so you don't need to panic if
you missed one in the middle,
with an explanation that's even
better than the one I just gave you.
So we made a few minor changes as well.
Framework header searching now
actually searches for frameworks.
First of all, a framework is supposed
to be an atomic unit.
There's no such thing as an
override framework or a delta
framework or part of a framework.
So when GCC finds a framework,
it stops looking for files
in that framework later on.
So if you've been overriding
system headers or system frameworks
by copying one header file and
then into a framework structure,
your program will no longer
work because it'll find that
one header file no problems,
but it won't find anything
else in the framework.
So you need to either copy the whole
framework or use some other mechanism.
Another improvement that we made is that
gcc no longer searches for frameworks
in directory specified with -i,
and it no longer searches for regular
headers in frameworks specified with -f.
So -i and -f are no
longer the same thing.
They now actually mean look for
frameworks or look for headers.
This helps to reduce the number of
headers that are accidentally found,
but it does mean that if you've
been using them interchangeably,
you need to now work out
which ones hold which.
And there were some minor changes.
So Objective C now properly
detects selector matching.
I mentioned the warning flag earlier,
but there's also other detection
involved that -- where it actually --
where the runtime behavior is improved.
We made some changes about better
detection of things that were
supposed to be void and aren't,
functions that were supposed
to return void and that were
actually trying to return a value,
functions that were supposed to return
a value and are actually returning void.
Zero messages for these are all really
straightforward and more or less
paraphrase what's on the screen there.
So we should also mention that one of
the significant changes in Xcode 2.1 is
that it's based on final fsf gcc 4.0,
which,
as at the time the CDs were printed,
was the latest gcc version -- the latest
fsf gcc release that you could get.
And we should also mention that
it's a fully open source project.
The source code is available at the --
with all the other WWDC 2005 sources.
And we should -- and if you want
to make some small minor change
that -- to your local copy,
you can download the source and build it.
Of course,
we caution that we're not going
to maintain your local change,
so that's kind of your responsibility.
So we caution against making significant
changes and then trapping yourself
into one version of the compiler.
So, in summary, move to gcc 4.0.
Not only does it let
you build Intel apps,
build 64-bit apps, run faster,
it also has thousands of bug fixes in it.
It has better optimizations
and it runs faster.
So it's our best compiler yet.
You may have to adjust
your code a little bit,
but the changes--the long
list that I've added,
most of those problems are rare.
There have been large projects
built that have had none of these
problems and that have just worked.
When you do find these problems,
as you can see from the examples,
many of these are really easy to fix.
You just add a couple of characters.
So--and hopefully you can remember
some of those error messages and
some of those situations and go
back and look at the sample code.
And with any luck, you'll get it.
you'll be able to see what
those few character changes are.
So at this point,
I believe we have plenty
of time for questions.
Oh, but first,
So if the presentation didn't fully
answer your problems with gcc 4.0
or if you have further questions,
first of all,
don't forget the sample code.
I know I've mentioned
it three times already,
but it's really very helpful.
That's available on the WDC website at
the same URL as all the other sample
code documentation and other resources.
There's also the gcc 4.0 release notes.
There's also information
about the new C++ ABI and what
you can rely on in that ABI.
There's the gcc manual,
which tells you all
of these option names,
what they exactly do,
and a large number of other
options that there's far too little
time for me to talk about here.
So that's all available at the website.
In addition,
there are some related sessions
that I should particularly mention.
There is a lab, the Xcode and Tools lab.
It's just across the way.
All you have to do is
walk across the corridor,
and there will be people
there who can help you.
In addition,
if none of that seems to help
or you just want to tell us
how wonderful the compiler is,
there's the Development Tools Feedback
Forum Friday at 5:00.
And finally, if all else fails,
you can contact Matthew, who is not me.
or anybody else in or we
have or DTS in general,
ADC in general,
we have lots of people who
are quite happy to help you
to take your bug reports,
to assist you with migration,
to suggest strategies.